I have to start recording.
OK. So. As I said, uh, the lab for this
week is on the blackboard. Lab 04 and the.
This week's topic is about file system and
I gradually explain what I mean by this.
But in this folder you
can find the assignment.
I may change this folder name later,
but pretty much I mean lectures
lecture this week.
The number of this week and then
the assignment. Also for the labs.
In the Labs 404 week,
this is the title of the Lab Dash
script for test cases and you
can find the assignment the the
deadline for the lab and lecture.
One mistake.
Actually most satisfying did was that.
Uh, it's made most sister made.
This mistake is that the leg?
Lecture, Simon and the latter
summit both have the same deadline,
which is 4:00 AM in the morning,
not in the afternoon in the
morning or Wednesdays.
So for instance,
this week Wednesday,
you're gonna have the deadline
for both lab 03 and lecture 03.
The Wednesday after the reading week
are you gonna have the deadline at
4:00 AM in the morning Wednesday?
So most of the students had late
submission because they thought that it's.
Of Wednesday afternoon,
but it's not the case.
So one thing is that I want
to ask you whether you.
I had the chance to watch the recommended
movies in this course during the weekend.
Anybody?
Haha.
Good Alexis, at least saw the Matrix Harnish.
So Victor, to answer yes.
I mean any question about the lecture
assignment and lecture is gonna be in
the forum lecture about the lab gonna
be in the laboratory forum and etc.
Yes, if you have questions about the
electoral after posting that far yet.
So I'm asking this because. Ah.
Because there might be some questions
in the exam about the movies.
Now you are interested to watch
these movies during the week.
Pulp Fiction, but I want to watch
X makeena soon. Yes, mocking?
Actually, these are good
movies and I said I'm kidding.
No, we don't have any question
about the movies in the exam.
I just wanted to tell you that these
are great movies and it is definitely
worth your time watching these movies.
So. Just to do a recap,
we have just few slides about last
week and I'm going to quickly cover
these and then go to the new topic.
So we already said that, uh?
Shell is a.
Kind of part of an operating system,
so if you have an operating system,
the core part of an operating system is
the kernel that we haven't discussed yet,
but an opening system if it is standard
operating system must have a shell and
the main task of shell is to Buddhist,
wrap our programs and operating
system without the shell,
nobody gonna buy it because you cannot
use the kernel to describe your program.
So, but we said that there are some
common questions from the programmers.
The Colonel. So either they have to
write their own program and then ask.
These questions are system calls
through the kernel or because these
are frequent questions they can, uh,
the operating system or the developer
of the operating system provides
them as a library routine first.
And then because they become very frequent,
so it's not putting as library routine.
They put it inside the shell.
So basically they deliver these
programs as a part of the shell and
we call them commands or builtins.
And. Or builtins.
And we already discussed what are
these commands and etc and what
are different types of shells and
what is the standard shell and etc.
However, this one, uh? Important part
of the before we go to the channel,
we have to discuss is the variables.
So the main idea was that we have some
questions to answer to ask from the kernel.
He said that some of these
questions are very common.
As a result, the operating
system delivered at the library.
Some of them are very,
very common or most frequent,
or they deliver it as a part
of commands to the shell,
and some of these questions.
They have fixed answers,
or at least the answers are not that dynamic.
So usually the answer to these
questions are mostly I mean constant.
Like a frequently asked question in
a website you know in any website we
have a list fixed list of questions
with the fixed answers FA cues.
So the same idea actually is
happening in the operating system.
So basically for these are very very
common question and with the fixed answers.
The operating system provides
pairs of key values or questions.
And answers.
Perch so.
This set of these key value pairs
are called system variables.
They are also called environment variables,
global variables, Unix variables.
But honestly, based on my experience,
I would call them kernel variables.
Why because these key value pairs
is maintained by the kernel?
So although you may hear about system
variables and what these are different names,
but all of these variables
are handled by the kernel.
And kernel keeps track of the key values.
Uh,
usually I know the and by convention these
variables are named by uppercase letters,
just to make it defense just to
differentiate these variables
with other variables that I'm
going to discuss in future slides.
And in order to.
See or get the answer or the value of
the key or there are different ways.
The most immediate way is asking the shell.
To do a system call for you and
ask the kernel to give the value.
So basically if this is an operating system.
Inside offices and we have the Colonel.
And here is the shell.
Inside the kernel we have
these system variables.
To see what are these system
variables and what are their
values you can have, you can use.
The shell shell has a standard command.
You already said that this is a
standard command by the posts.
All the standard shell must have
this command ECHO and if you
use ECHO with the name of that
question or that key upper case.
Preceded by a dollar sign the
shell on behalf of you does it.
System called the kernel,
Retrieve the answer or the value
part of the key and return AT.
Pizza. I mean we have a
lot of system variables,
but these are the most common words.
For instance, this is the operating
system type which returns the name
of the current operating system.
For instance, this is the Linux new
in the schools computer system.
So basically when you do this,
you command the shell by the
echo to do a system call on your
behalf and retrieve the value of
this key from the Colonel and the
Colonel returns this value to the
shell and the shell shows the man.
What is the current user of the system?
The shell you asked the shell by
echo the shell does the system
called to the kernel and the value
gonna be retrieved by the shelter.
You and this is the man.
There are some, uh,
you can see there are some system
variables that there is no value for them.
We call these system variables,
not set or unset.
This this is common.
You may set it, or you may.
Also you may unset for instance
you may unset is system variable,
or you may set a system variable
which doesn't have any value.
So you can set with a new value,
or you can unset the current system variable.
How, uh, I won't explain,
but that's a good question.
But among these systems were variables,
one of them is very important.
The system variable path.
Be careful,
this is a system where you are why?
Because it is uppercase.
We may have other variables with
the same name but not upper case.
Those are not system variables by convention.
What is system variable path?
System variable path is a list of
directories separated by column.
What it does is that basically it
adds a certain space to the shell.
What it means is this.
I just want to explain it by an example.
We already said that when you in
the lab 02 also in the lab 03 when
you want to compile your program,
if it is this command prompt in front
of the command prompt you say you.
You called the C compiler and
then you put your.
A, for instance, your program file,
and then you compile it.
We already asked you that the C compiler
when you put it here is a command.
Or builtins in a shell or.
It's a program.
Fight separated from the shell.
We already said that, uh,
if we don't specify that this is a,
this is our own program file
by the correct folder.
For instance,
we said that by dot forward slash
we say that we are in the correct
folder and then you put your program.
This way the shell knows that this is a
program file inside your current folder.
However, for the C compiler,
we don't put any dot forward slash.
So it may seems that it's a command.
However,
if you look at this folder inside
a unique space operating system,
which basically means that
user system resource.
In the binary folder,
this folder includes the
opcode of a lot of programs.
One of them is the C compiler.
So if you go to this directory
by change directory,
this is a command for standard
shell change directory.
You can go inside that directory
and you see if you do LS,
meaning the list of the files
you see the C compiler.
So then C compiler is not a command,
it's a program file.
Inside this folder or inside this directory.
So then you may decide to
use the correct folder.
The current folder is this folder.
And then compile your Hello
C program or main C program.
Whatever program you have.
But if you do that,
the C compiler reason error
because it cannot find your C
program inside this folder.
Because this program is in your
own folder in your home folder.
So in order to solve the problem,
you have two solutions.
Either you copy the C compiler
to your own folder.
Or you copy your C program to this folder.
If you try both of these
approaches, both fails.
The reason is that if you want to
copy your C program to this folder,
you don't have permission
because you are a normal user,
you are not at the administrative
of the program and this folder is a
critical folder for an operating system.
So you have to have a a special privilege to
copy or change any file inside this folder.
So you cannot copy anything in this folder.
And also if you want to copy the
C compiler to your Home Directory,
C compiler depends on other programs
you have to copy all those dependencies
into your home folder again.
So it's not a convenient way.
So the best work around is
the system variable path.
So how it works is like this.
Basically, in the system variable
path you can include directories.
Separated by column.
So this is one directory.
This is another directory.
This is another directory and etc.
One of these directories are here.
Use use user system resource bin.
So when you add a directory
to the system variable path.
It shows or it is a helps or it
kind of adds the old the program
files inside these directories
to the search path of the shell.
So when you put something
in front of the shell.
The first thing the shell does is
that whether it's a command or not.
So it looks up inside itself
to see whether the name that
you put in front of the command
is a built in command or not.
If it is the building command,
it runs that otherwise.
It goes to the next search space,
which is the current folder.
So how is it distinguished?
It is the correct folder by the dot
forward slash whatever name you put here.
If you didn't put the Koran folder,
it goes to the other directories.
What are the other directories these
directors are all listed in the system path,
so it tries to find.
I match the names that you sorry.
It tries to find the name you put in
front of the command prompt with one of
the program files in the directories
listed in the system variable path.
For instance here, if you put CC,
it looks up to the command.
In building commands.
It's not built in commands.
Also, it doesn't have the correct folder.
So what is the next space to search?
All the directories inside the
system path assistant variable path.
It looks to this folder.
It doesn't find CC.
It looks to this folder.
It finds CC,
so then it runs the CC inside
this directory for you.
Mason asks what is the difference
between the dollar home?
Which is a system variable shows the
home directory of the Koran folder,
current user and the PW.
T which is the lower case.
So this is not a system variable.
This is another type of
variable that we can discuss.
But The thing is that at anytime you can
change the path of working directory,
but this is the default home directory
whenever you log into a Unix based system.
You entered this path.
So this is fixed for all users
based on the at the moment of the
login or the default home folder,
but this is you can change it at
runtime for the working directory
of your environment at anytime.
And also this is not a system variable.
So again, you may ask.
You may ask is it possible to change
the value of a system variable?
Is it possible to unset it?
Is it possible to add a new pair?
You want to add a new pair to the
kernel of an operating system.
It is possible.
But one thing is that if
you turn off your computer,
all your changes are in kernel,
which is inside the memory.
So the kernel is a process inside the memory.
All these changes are is still in the memory.
So you have to persist your change because
when you turn on your computer system again,
you want to see these changes again.
So it is able you're able to
persist the changes to the system
variables through the file.
So there is a file that you
can change that file.
That contains all the system variables,
keys and pairs. But how?
The thing is that the way you can change
these values are on set or modified.
Depends on the shell.
For instance,
in the SHL you can do it differently,
and I mean compared to differences paschell.
Or compared to these,
Ozzy shell and attached.
So because of this,
differences are not going to explain.
So basically you can simply Google it,
for instance for the dash.
There's a command export.
Uh,
you can export a new value of
a key and then it becomes.
The change is still in the memory and
then you can persist in a file in.
He one of these folders that
need administrative privilege and
then at anytime that the kernel
loads to the memory after you
turn on your computer you can see
the change the system variable.
Do they need a? We have a question.
Oh only says that PWD is
a builtin command or not.
According to the Post, six is not.
However, a shell may add this as a
builtin command just to show you the
current working directory of the user.
It is possible to be a command,
but as far as I know according to the
post is not being built in command.
So we have.
You can also just get a
large deposit with peers.
Haha, but at any time in one day
during the day is a maintenance day,
so you have to turn off all your system
and do maintenance so it's still you
need to persist your changes. So.
Behavior says, uh?
So one thing is that in terms
of The thing is these system.
Let me explain this and then you'll
figure out what's the difference
and is it possible to have the same
value for different keys and etc.
So besides the system variables
or kernel variables,
we have other types of variables
that I name it other variables.
You can call this user variables,
local variables, shell variables,
so as you can see here.
These are following the same
principle of the kernel variables
for different programs or different
part of the operating system.
For instance,
Shell may have its own variables.
A user when it logs into the system,
the kernel may provide system very
some variables just for that specific
user to be changed by that user,
not for other users.
So these in order to distinguish these
variables from the kernel variables,
we usually have a lower case
key for these variables.
And you can use this same command
from the shell to see the
value of that key value pair.
These variables are also can be modified,
can be unsat can be and you can
have a new I mean key value pair.
You can persist the change and also
again like the system variables.
It depends on the bash how to change
the key values and how to persist it.
But the main important thing is this.
What is the difference between
kernel and non Canon variables?
The main importance is the
scope of the variable.
So we already said that when the
kernel bootstraps inside the memory,
it controls all the machine and
all the other applications are.
On top of the kernel.
So as part of the kernel,
we said that we had the kernel
variables or system variables.
Bison scanner variables.
As a part of the kernel.
So because.
As you as you can see in this position.
Any change or any new, uh,
kybal you system variables in these
variables gonna be seen by all the
application on top of the kernel.
And also if one application tries
to change a value of the system
variable or adding new key value pair,
all the other application going to see that.
OK. So now if for instance you change the.
OS name by this by this program.
Either through I'll tell you how we
can do through a program or through
a shell change the system variable.
If you change it then all the other programs,
like this one, and like other programs,
gonna see the change.
So it it a change going to be broadcasted
to all the applications because.
Uh, this is the place that you
have the system variables.
This is so this scope is very wide.
Did minimum scope is the program
variables so inside your program
you already know in the C program
you can define a variable,
for instance integer variable and
putting for instance value on on that.
Not having integer here,
for instance carestar P name
and put the name for that.
You know that the program variables
cannot be accessed by other programs
or other users of this system.
So inside the program.
We have this scope for the program variables.
However, the program can.
Access the system variables.
In between the camera variables
and the program variables we have
the shell and user variables.
So ideally any user of the system has
variables according to that specific user.
Any change gonna be only for that user.
All the other users gonna
will not see the change.
Or if anything added in this
user variable for this user.
This user only can see that,
not other users.
Also this shell.
If you have for instance paschell
in your operating system.
There are some variables
associated with this shell.
If you change or add a new key
value pair to the shell variables,
anybody who are going to use that
shell gonna see the uh that variable.
For instance, you can log in as a
Hussein and change the shell variables,
for instance bore into another name.
For instance my something,
and if you do that and make it persistent,
all the other users that gonna use
this shell cannot see the change.
This is ideally.
However,
in practice.
You will see that different
versions of the Unix and different
implementations of operating system.
They don't have any standard or they
don't agree on the defined borders for
the user variables and shell variables.
They agree whether the system
variables and what is the scope?
What is the program variables
and what is the scope?
However, in terms of these two,
between there.
There are some differences,
so that's why we put more emphasis on
the system variables and less focus
on the other type of variables such
as shell variables or user variables.
And now in order to answer
behavior question also I think
it was Miss Times question.
It is possible to have a same value
for different keys in different scopes.
Princess you may have.
Key home with the value. For instance a.
Forward Slash home forward Slash HF
and I also in the shell variables.
You may have another.
A shell variables home,
the same key, but it is lowercase,
so it's not the same key because it
is case sensitive and the same value.
Forward Slash home forward Slash
HF AI user variable you may have
for instance PW the same value.
So there is no restriction.
For the values of these key value pairs or a.
Yeah, sometimes again it depends on the
implementation of the operating system.
If you change the system variable.
This shell automatically updates the.
Shell variables or may automatically
update the user variables.
As I said,
because there is no well defined policy
about the shell and user variables in all
depends on different operating systems.
Linux has different behavior,
a different distribution of the Unix
concepts had different version.
Mac OS has different policy
about this and etc.
That's why we don't focus on these things.
The only thing is that pay
attention is cannot variables
and the program variables.
We already know how to use the program
variables in C language and now we
know what are the system variables.
Other variables it's good not
to rely on them.
So. Other than the shell to see the
value of system variables is there?
Is there any other way to see to
ask the kernel about the system
variables or camera variables?
The answer is yes. Any operating
system comes with library routine.
We already said that as standard operating
system must have a library routine and
implement a minimum set of header files.
One of them is the standard library
which is the C standard library shipped
by any standard operating system.
In Lab 02 you use this library routine to
know the values of some system variables.
How, by calling this function?
Again, this is using the library routine.
It's not a system called.
So we already told you that
posts provide the list of library
routines that should be implemented
by a standard operating system.
One of them is the standard library
for the C. And in order to see
a value of a system variables,
you have to include this header file and do
the function and you compile your program.
By doing this either you statically
or dynamically link that function.
The output of that function
into your program.
So schematically you are using a
library routine and the library
routine does the system call for you.
So this is the exact program
that you used in your lab 02.
So you see that we added the library
routine standard library for the C
and then this is the call to the
get environment variable. Again.
You see here they didn't call IT
system variable or kernel variable.
Environment variable is called.
So, and this is the environment variable
user and this is the environment
variable or system variable a PWD.
So this is the way that you can
programmatically without the
help of the shell,
knows the value of system variables.
However, a very advanced version of knowing
the value of system value value of the
system variables is the system called.
Without the help of Shell without the
help of library routine, you want to
do directly system call to the kernel.
This is possible through a system called.
Unix standard library.
So this is the abbreviation for Unix.
The standard library.
And there is a variable.
Environment or devolution free environment?
So it gives you the list of all system
variables available in the kernel.
Again, pay attention.
This is a system called.
This is not a library routine,
so we are going to do a system call.
And you already said that this library
routine. This this header file.
Is a part of system called
standardized by the POSIX.
So your application if
you add this header file,
does the system call directly to the kernel.
And this is the example C program.
So you add the header for the system call.
But again, this is not a library in
this system called. To the Colonel.
And that header file has a variable.
Basically,
I believe you already know what is this.
This is a list of lists of characters.
Basically it's a pointer.
To a place.
That each place of that.
Our location is a pointer to
another list of characters.
So this is a pointer.
And this is a pointer,
double pointer, single pointer.
And this is the actual characters.
So here for instance we have
HOM equal to something.
Here we have for instance OS and
am something equal to South.
And it's such.
So list of lists of characters.
And you can reach a key value by the index,
for instance 0123 and etc.
So if you run this program,
it does a loop on all the
available pointers in this.
RA and then tries to output the.
List of characters for that location.
And here is the old system variables.
By doing this system called the kernel.
The first one, the shell. Language,
as you can see here the correct folder.
And what is the printer?
What is the IP SSH connection right now?
What is the language and etc.
There are a lot of these so
I just put the part of that.
So. Those were. A accessing the system
variables or kernel variables. How about
the shell variables or user variables?
We said that using the shell you can
use ECHO dollar sign and the name of
the user variable or shell variables.
How about I mean accessing food library
routing or through the system call?
The thing is that as I said,
because these are not well defined
or standardized by the process.
Some operating system may allow you to do
to use a library routine to see these values.
Some may not, so it's not that easy
and because they are not standardized,
there are some work arounds.
I'll leave it as a research topic for you.
For instance, one way is that you elevate
user variable or a shell variable and B.
Make it as a system variable
and then access that.
Won't work around his desk,
but there are other ways you can do,
and you can search about that.
Any questions?
Guys. So go ahead, Michelle.
You can enable them.
No, I can hear myself.
Uh. It's still on now, I cannot hear
myself, but I cannot hear you to either.
Feature home and make it their system.
When I entered it CD command.
The next time I use a shell.
Will it take me to go home?
One thing is that CD is the change directory,
meaning that wherever you are
you can do change directly to
any directory that you want.
So this is a built in command.
But your question is that.
I mean if we change home
and make it persistent.
The next time that you log in the
default folder gonna be this value.
So for instance, if you change it to.
Uh, I don't know.
For instance, home sorry forward slash home.
Forward slash. Uh.
A forward slash P if you change it
like that and make it persistent.
Or even not persistent,
for instance,
as long as the system is on and
you log off and then you log in.
Then you end up with this folder
as your default environment.
So this is your. I mean, this is
the default home directory of a.
Yourself you're using.
So one thing is that you may
ask that if I change this.
All the other user gonna have the same,
uh, I mean change for instance all the
other user may end up with the same folder.
So this is a good question,
so if I change home when I'm connecting
to the system to this folder.
My username is H *****.
What happens if Ahmed?
Connect to the system Ahmad
ends up with this home folder
or another home folder.
That's a good question.
Uh, I I didn't explain how to
change the system variable.
I said it depends on the shell,
so I leave it as a research topic
for you to do that, but for bash,
one way is that to do export.
This is the command for access for.
A for Z shell it is set am I think so.
These are different commands
for the shell to make a change
to the system variables.
But this is a good question.
I leave it for you and may
appear in the midterm exam.
Go ahead, victor.
Yes, Sir, I'm just curious. Or once we do,
save them to make them persist.
UM, like are they stored like in a
file directly on the hard drive?
That's like like directly
accessible by the kernel?
Or is it like even before that,
like on the master boot record
that these values are stored?
No, no, no, no no.
So when when you make it change through
the program or through the shell,
it is still in the memory but in
the memory part of the kernel.
So you remember we have the memory here.
And in part of the memory we have the kernel.
So when you do the change the change gonna
be inside the memory inside the kernel.
But if you turn off the computer,
all your change is gonna be lost, yeah?
To be inside the file is a file in a
specific folder of the hard disk drive
part of the kernel that you have to persist.
The change in that file.
Yeah OK gotcha.
What is the name of that file?
Uh, honestly, I don't know.
Actually I'm I knew but I forgot.
But you can see that there is a
file that in that file you can
persist all these key value pairs.
Yeah and so then for like an
operating system like Windows.
Basically when I do you know like
I'm sure we all installed like the
JRE before so when I add that to my
system environment path variables,
I'm technically accessing that file
and changing it there exactly.
Exactly on Windows, yes, on Windows,
when you open the system variables
and then you add something and
you apply and you OK.
I mean press the OK button.
It makes persistent and
that's why you have to.
You have to re run all
the other shells again.
I'm not the,
I mean the explorer,
but the other command prompt you
have to close them and then open
them again to see the changes.
But yeah,
as long as you apply and OK
it become persistent.
Yeah,
but it's not the case in
unique space in Unix space.
Uh,
I think our niche could define for
the bash in the dark patch or see.
Actually this is dash RC, not bash.
Any batch has its own file.
Again,
if you persist your change in
that file it is a shell variable.
It's not a system variable.
Kernel had has its own file to make
this system can variable persistent,
but it's a file you have to
manually change that file, yeah?
OK, thank you, you're welcome.
So. I'm going to continue with a.
OK, I have to. Clean all of these so.
The last part of a shell that we are
going to cover very quickly is shell script.
It's an important topic of the shell,
but as long as you need this part
to I mean to solve some specific
problems for your program,
so we are not going to go into
the details
of this script, but I just wanted to show
you what are the advantages and how you
can benefit from this topic Shell script.
So what is shallow script?
Basically, Schells says that
sometimes the programmer or the user.
Post to ask a sequence of questions.
For instance, either by using the builtin
commands or running some programs that the
programmer already wrote himself or herself.
Anything that's gonna be asked by the shell
maybe becomes very frequent or becoms.
I mean, uh, I mean for some
specific tasks become redundant.
So the shell says that I can provide
an additional feature which basically
means that you can put all these
sequence of commands or programs into a file.
And then give me that file.
I run the commands or the programs
in the in that file line by line.
This file is called script.
Very simple. So.
For instance,
here we can ask the shell to echo Hello War
normally in in front of the command prompt.
Also you after you enter you press the enter.
You can also put echo.
My name is.
What is the value of current user.
This system variable you can ask the shell
to give the value of this system variable.
However, you can put these
sequence of commands in front.
I mean in each line of the file.
We called this sequence script
and you can save it in a file.
By convention we put the extension as add to.
Just show that this file containing
is containing some commands
or some programs to a shell.
So shell script.
This is a convention,
but it can be any extension,
for instance a or dot B or
whatever or without any extension.
But this is a mean way among the programmers.
So you can create a new file.
You can put this sequence of
commands that you normally put
in front of the command prompt,
and then you can save it.
An important line of this file must be this.
The first line followed by the number sign.
It's a command command line.
It's not a command,
or it's not the program,
it's just a comment to indicate
that this file contains the builtin
commands or program to be run,
but by what shell?
So this is the name of shelving that
this is a script for the bash shell if
you want to write this script for SHL,
you have to for instance put it.
Forward Slash being is at 4 Z shell.
You can put it forward slash been the edge.
One thing is that not all
shells support scripting.
For instance,
is edge the original shell
of the Unix may not support.
This is a question for your lecturer.
Simon actually may not support scripting.
Advance shalmi support or give you this
cool feature or scripting feature zichal
supports that Daschle supports that attach.
So.
How you run a script you can simply
give your script file today.
Bash,
so we rightly script for the bash shell.
We save it and we give it to the bash.
So the bash shell.
In front of the bash shell, receive this
script and run the command line by line.
So this is the first line Echo Hello World.
This is the second line echo my name is.
This is the value of dollar user, the
system variable and then this is the echo.
Here is the content of my folder and
this is the result of the command LS.
List. So again.
Echo Hello World echo my name is
something here is the content and then
the command list the current folder.
So this tilde tilde character
is actually equal to the up.
I think home directory yes.
Home.
Director.
So the content of Home directory.
So. Whenever you need to run sequence
of commands and programs in, such as,
put them, interpret them into an, etc.
You can put all of them in one
file and just run one script.
Another way to run a shell script is this.
You can make is shell script file executable.
This is a command builtin
command for all the shell.
This is the post standard command change.
Mode. So basically you can
make a file executable,
meaning that it helps the shell and
the kernel that the content of file is
some commands or some opcode in terms
of the program files in C program
that you have to execute the lines.
So it's not differences,
image file or it's not an audio file,
its executable file.
So if you do that then you can.
Run it.
As a program file.
So the script file can be run
as a program file executable
program file like this.
So there are two ways to run a script,
either just give it to a bash or to
the shell that run it, or make it
executable and write as a program file.
So. And amazing, uh?
I mean, uh, application of the shell
script is for your lab for last week.
And also, I mean, this week the lab 03.
So you remember that for this lab you
have to write a code for main C and then
give it to the compiler C making an assembly.
And then press enter.
If everything goes well, then you have
to do the same for the other file.
Increment that see.
These becomes assembly lines
and then you have to make up
code out of the assembly lines.
Again, you have to call CC,
make it make these assembly lines up code
again for the increment assembly lines,
and then finally you have
to link them together.
Each time that he changed this far,
you have to run these commands
again and again.
So a better way is that put all
these commands in one script.
For instance, this is the name that I chose,
and this is the extension.
So you can create a shell script
for bash shell and save it.
Either you can give it to the
bash shell or make it executable.
And then run it each time that you run it it.
Uh.
Compose your C for the main and for
their increment and then make it
opcode by assembler and then link
it so all the commands are gonna be.
Execute that line by line.
So this is a better way to just
run one shell script to do five
different commands in one step.
So now that we see that a
shell scripts are kind of.
Set off a statement that gonna be run.
So these are the interesting questions.
Shell when it runs the script,
it compiles it to assembly.
And then after that it translated to opcodes.
Or no. Basically, is still the shell
is going to parse it and run it.
There is no compilation for this
statement inside the script and etc.
Another question is that who runs this?
Well, we know that we give it to the shell
and this is a script for the any shell
that we wrote this statement for that.
So at the end of the day,
Shell runs that or processor or kernel.
And can we call these scripts programs?
So I'll I just give you the answers,
but I won't give you the justification.
I leave it for you to think about that.
The answer is that the shell
scripts normally are not going
to be compiled into assembly.
Lines are not going to be
compiled to opcodes. Why?
Because the shell program inside
the shell programs they handle
and parse these statements.
So there is no op code for these statements
that you put inside this script.
And we know that these scripts
actually the shell gonna run your
lines of command line by line.
However, we can consider them
as a program because program
is running some statements,
financial statements to accomplish a task,
so we can call these scripts programs.
But these are different type of programs.
Mother a shells day for efficiency.
They make an assembly and up
code of your shell script,
so I put it in parentheses.
And as a result.
Shell instead of running
your scripts line by line,
it creates an opcode.
And of your statements and
run it as a separate process.
Uh, these are advanced kind
of shell scripting, but.
Whenever you want to write a
shell for an operating system,
these are important for you to decide.
But for us,
we just write a shell script
the way that the shell script
is executed by the shell for
this course doesn't matter,
but it's good for you to know
behind the scene how the
shell runs the shell script.
And. The whole topic of the this
week lab and the reading week.
And I mean the the lab 04 is about
shell as a programming language.
In this lab I tried to explain some
important aspects of shell programming.
But it's a huge topic,
so we are not going to cover
all details of that it needs.
I mean, at least one semester.
But knowing that, what are the capabilities
and what are the powers is enough.
Whenever you need these powers,
you can go and read yourself and
write the shell script for your task.
For this course,
it's good to know there is an
opportunity for putting these statements
of the shell in one file and run
this script in one single step.
Any questions?
No questions about the
shell shell programming.
So Mason asks, can you
repeat why we add sharp?
Oh, because you have to tell that this
is a script for what type of shell?
So as we said most, for instance,
you may have a script for a seashell.
So you have to say that this is a shell
to be executed, what by what shell?
So this first line actually determines that.
So it shows that this is a
shared script for bash shell.
If you start with ZSH script
for the challenge.
So this is a lecture question.
I lecture assignment question
that if I write the script for
Bash and I give it to a seashell.
Is it going to be run smoothly without
problem or there are some problems?
How about the reverse?
If I write a shell in ZSH shell
and give it to the bash shell?
Is it going to be run without a
problem or there are some problems?
Any other questions?
Yes, yes there is. No.
There is no restriction on the extension.
There is no excuse.
So either you for instance if you have.
A dot TXT including the uh,
shell commands and programs.
You can, for instance for the shot
you can give it to the bash bash text
in front of the bash command prompt,
or you can make the T file as the executable.
Plus, X means that executable change
mode means change mode of this file
to executable and then you can simply.
Call the file. For your screen, yeah.
So I'm going to quickly go
to the next slide here.
So if there is no question about the shell,
I'm going to start a new topic.
So, but before that I need to make
sure that all of you are listening.
So give me some feedbacks. Thank you,
Darrell. Thank you Luca meysam.
Yeah, we.
Thank you son.
Thank you Danielle. Thank you salmen.
So it means that everything is clear or.
You have questions, but you cannot.
I mean you don't want to
ask your questions or etc.
Anyways, I'm available in the office
hour or you can put your question.
I mean you can read about these material
later and then if any questions you
can put it in the discussion board.
So now I'm going to finish the shell topic.
Whatever we set it just. As I said,
there is a huge details about the shell,
shell script and other type of,
I mean variables etc.
But uh, I just wanted you
to know these topics.
As we already said,
there are various implementation
of Unix based operating system,
so we cannot cover all these
differences and details.
So just to showcase what are the main
topics and you can follow or you can Google
about these details whenever you need them.
So we are done with the shell part and
now we're gonna gradually move toward
the main part of an operating system,
the kernel.
And we start from the most easier part,
the most easiest part part of
the file system.
So again,
this is the scene from the Matrix movie A,
but I put this one because in
this in this topic we are going
to use something very similar
to the phone line connection.
In this movie,
if you watch the movie you can
see that there is a link between
the two different world,
the real world and the matrix world.
And in order to get into one word from
another word or get out of one word,
you need it's hard phone call.
And the important thing is that it
doesn't matter what is the phone number.
The only thing matters is the
phone connection.
So.
That's why I put this style and
now I'm going to explain what
does this mean for file system.
So among all different part of the kernel.
We start with the mostly I mean
easier part which is the File Manager.
As you can see here.
And, uh. In terms of
explaining what is filemanager?
File Manager can be a.
Kind of splitted into different
levels of abstractions.
The first level of abstraction that
we can call it high level file system,
which we are going to introduce this week.
A is basically do not explain or do not deal
with any details of the physical device.
Whether the file is in the USP,
whether a file is in a CD drive,
CD ROM or DVD ROM, or whatever
storage the file actually persist.
The high level part of the file
system don't care, doesn't care.
Then we have a kind of mid level or low
level part of the file system and at the.
Then the deepest level we have the
actual device. To deal with the.
Bits and bytes are inside the historic
device. Or other type of devices.
So we'll start with the high level.
Next, I mean this week also
or the week after the reading,
which we may touch on the low level.
But we win, so this part and this part.
But the bad device part we don't
go to the detail because this is
basically more about electronics.
And, uh, needs some knowledge about harbor,
so we don't care about the
device level of the file system.
We just introduce some low
level of the file system,
but we try to cover all the
important part of the high level
part of the file system.
Why I said file system?
Ideally I mean in an academic way
we call it File Manager. Paul,
it is widely known in files as a file system.
So you may not hear about File
Manager in development among
developers of operating system,
but academically we can call it File Manager.
But file system is the normal name for that.
And again we are in a high
level definition of file system.
From the high level definition
of file system. Any device.
Is a single 1D array of bytes.
This is a very important abstraction.
One DRA of boys means that
this string of pirates.
So for instance, this is a.
String of poets. Beats of 0101 etc.
So 1D. RA or Sting or bite?
Why I focus on the aerial
restraint because order matters.
This is before this point,
and this is before this point so.
Or their matters.
And that's why you call
it this string or array.
But it is windy.
So there is no.
Two define, for instance,
when you open a text file,
you see some lines and etc.
This is not a two define.
This is a stream of lines
on top of each other.
There is no. 2D monitor.
We don't have two D monitors.
Monitors are array of pixels on
top of each other, so a monitor is.
Pig cells on top of each other
a very long string of pixels.
Keyword is a long array of characters.
So there is no 2D keyboard
or 3D Q or that etc.
4 high level abstractions in the file system.
Even memory even process it.
These are all one DRA of bytes.
Memory is just in a way off
white on top of each other.
Processor is just an array of
instruction that we just give the
instruction and it stores and execute.
Although they this string is I mean smaller,
but they still we can think of it
as a small area of instructions.
However, because memory and
processor are very important part
in order to execute programs.
We asked the fire system to please
give up these two important devices
and give them to the process manager.
These are the two exceptions,
only to exception for the devices.
And we give the management of these
two devices to process manager
because these two devices are
essential for executing a program.
All the other devices are the same.
Keyboard is a read only device,
so basically it's a stream of characters.
That can be just receive information.
Printer is a stream of characters.
That can be just transmit information
into the device or right into the device.
Monitor again, it's a write only
device which basically is the one DRA
of bites that we can. Put the bits.
Or bites in on top of each other.
But these are pixels, I mean,
the amount of the colors.
But again from the file system of a kernel,
these are just string of bits or bytes.
Touch screen.
Princess, we can in our mobile phones
or in some smart computer systems.
Uh, you cannot touch screen ability,
which basically it's a read write device,
so again, it's a 1D array of bytes
that not only you can read from below,
so you can write from.
For instance, when you touch some product,
this screen and something happens.
It basically acts like.
This string of characters are sending
you some string of characters or
some string of bits that shows the
position of a monitor that you touched.
The storage is.
These are read write devices.
Whether it's a hard destroy,
USPS, DMV, me, whatever.
You message cdrom.
Cdrom is read only DVD ROM
is a read only but CD.
With the right ability,
it's a read write device and attach again.
These are all.
Long string of characters.
You can receive.
You can write information into that.
Interestingly.
The first device that persisted in the few
first programs was the storage device.
So in these storage devices at the
first it was just a plain string of, uh,
I mean some holes and some not hold, etc.
They call it punch cards. Punch. Cards.
And then later it becomes, for instance,
again a long alley of Opcode 0010.
Something like that.
So because the for the first device
that could restore our programs,
we can see a string of points on top of
each other is stored in some device.
We pick a specific name for this string of
parts stored in a storage device as a file.
This is the birth of this world fight.
In computer systems.
So before this third devices,
everything was just a single
area of bits and bytes.
But because of the importance of this
storage device to install our program,
we call this string of bytes as file.
So now we can say that run this file,
run that file and etc.
So if you have two files,
you have to store it in two
different storage devices so it
stays device one still device 2.
So again, you have file one file two.
These are all the same.
So these are among the first,
I mean a third device that could store.
I mean the first programs.
But later as we go more move
forward the technology progress.
It's two devices becomes a larger and larger
meaning that they were able to store more.
Why it's a stream of points?
So then we could say that we can store
different stream of part in a single storage.
So we could then call them set up files.
Or informally,
you could say is largest rate device
is collection of sub devices.
But these devices are logical, not physical.
So in another word,
files is exactly the same name as device.
So. Whenever we say file we meet
device whenever we said device
being fired doesn't matter.
I mean whether it's E filing this
storage device or it's a keyboard
or Etsy monitor whatever fund this
level of abstractions we don't
care what is the actual file,
whether it's monitored,
whether it's a network device or etc.
So keyboard is a read only,
File Manager is right,
only file printer is a write only file.
Touch Screen is a read write file.
Who knows this? What is this?
Anybody? And I see.
Correct, Yes, network interface card.
Basically this is the device
that does communicate with other
computers through the network.
Again, found file system
is not a specific device,
it's a read write file like any other
fight hard disk drive read, write file.
But again we careful files.
We see hundreds of as a collection
of devices or collection of
files USB the same collection of
devices or collection of files.
Can you name other devices that
can treated as he single stream of
pets and then we can call it file?
Anybody?
Correct mouse, so mouse is
a read for read only file.
Write only file or read write
only file read write file.
Correct, actually mouse
is kind of like keyboard.
It's a read only file. What else?
Scanner correct is scanner.
Is it again? Read only file.
SSD again, SSD storage device.
It is able to be considered as a collection
of sub devices or read write files.
Monells did you tell pan for instance?
It's a read only file.
Camera correct yes.
Camera 01 thing.
One thing camera is.
That's a good question.
So you cannot write into camera,
so the camera is a readonly,
yes, correct?
Ah.
What else? Anyways, what did you see?
You see, this is a very good abstraction.
To handle all different types of devices.
You don't care about different hardware
physical differences. You will see
them as a single string of bytes.
Whenever you want to read from the
device you read from the area of bites.
Whenever you want to write to the device,
you're right to this array of bytes,
so you don't care how the device
handles the writing or reading.
So we have a question from Victor.
Go ahead. Yes Sir, we have like.
Especially for a read only device.
So basically you know like
let's say the mouse it has,
you know an index with a bunch of
like that's a mapping essentially
of what the button presses do.
So is there not a way though that
we could access that and then like
say I could change it so that
like I could switch my left and
right clicks or I could you know,
maybe make the like Miss Scroll button.
Print A series of eight characters
or something like that.
Is that possible? Yes, it is possible.
It can be faster for other devices,
for instance,
when you can turn off the printer.
Basically,
you are telling the printer to turn off,
so you're not reading your writing.
Or you can turn off the camera by writing
a program to turn off the camera.
For instance,
right now in the blackboard you
can enable or disable the camera.
It means that turning on or off
we do not consider these.
As is transferring the information.
From the file system part of viewpoint,
these are not eligible operations.
OK, so operations from the device manager.
These are commands to the device
and we called them the part that
that part of the kernel that handles
these types of commands or for the
device manager part of the Canon
from the fire system part of you.
We just whenever we need information to
read or whatever information to post
to the output of the computer system,
we call it read write.
So commands to the device is not
considered by the file system.
OK, gotcha.
Later,
we'll discuss that by device manager you
can send some command to the device,
but these are not transferring information,
and file system doesn't do anything
about that, yeah.
So in order for it to be considered
a write operation like commands
don't fall under that, but there
has to be a transfer of information.
Yes, but uh again, uh, I mean it is.
It is it is done differently from the
normal transfer of the information.
OK, gotcha. For the printer,
for instance, is that checking
whether the cartridge has been enough?
For instance, material right?
This checking is asking the printer whether
you have enough material now and then.
Transferring information or answer these
type of transfer of the information
is part of the commands and we
don't consider in the file system.
Yeah, so is it also somehow related
to like the communication protocol
like you know like?
Whatever the USB one is using versus like
a serial device and stuff like that like,
does that make a difference?
Or are those just essentially
pathways to do that? Actually,
we introduced this because we don't.
We don't want to deal with
those type of things.
At the file system.
For the high level,
we don't care how the USB recognized
itself to the system through what port,
serial port or other type of ports.
We don't care at this model.
Yeah, it's loading information is
getting to where it needs to go.
We don't care. Yeah OK, got it.
Yeah yeah.
As long as we are in the file
system part of the kernel right?
In device manager part of the
channel we care.
But for the file system we don't care.
Yeah, OK,
so those are in.
So does the device manager or portion
of the kernel ever interact with the
file system portion of the kernel
or are they like two completely
separate entities within the kernel?
Oh no, they may.
Yes definitely they interact.
For instance,
one thing is that for the file system
you may write a huge amount of file
into a USB and USB doesn't have any space.
What happens?
So it's kind of exception rates.
Who handles that a device management
there is a communication between the
manage different part of the managers.
Yes yeah, OK.
So could you write careful?
Be careful in this course we are not
going to write an operating system right?
So we are going to know how the
operating system works and use it.
But these questions are very
interesting question.
When you want to write an operating system.
So how to interact handle
these situations and.
A code interaction between
different parts of the kernel.
Yeah.
So I guess I'm I'm still a little confused,
so the mapping the file that
maps that specific devices like
operations is that within the device
manager or is that within the file
system and the device manager is
the bridge between those two?
One thing is that for instance.
All the devices in an operating
system can be modeled as as a file.
For instance, we have a A.
Be happy we have seen a would
be a keyword
here would be a monitor.
See would be a fight.
OK, so on this price sister
if you copy a file into this.
A folder it raises an error because
this is a read only folder.
Who knows, this is the keyboard,
the device manager.
But file system doesn't care.
The file system says that
it's a read only folder.
You cannot write into this folder.
This is a manatee.
This is a test.
This is a monitor.
You copy your file to this folder.
The device manager re streamed the value
of these to the monitor and show it
as a colorful pixel for the file system.
Doesn't care, I mean,
it's just a normal folder or directory,
right?
This is this is one thing.
For instance,
for the file system,
when you copy a file to this folder,
you don't.
Defy System doesn't care that this
folder is in a USP or it is in a hard
disk drive or it's in network interface.
It just copy the file into this.
Who can understand the device manager
and other part of the kernel knows
this is connected to, for instance,
an actual file in the USB?
OK.
Again,
this is a high level file
system also have lower level
that we will discuss later,
but this is a highly as long as
we are dealing with a high level.
All these devices are directories or files.
Gotcha, OK. Thank you Sir.
To discuss it later, I mean in detail,
but this is an amazing abstraction provided
by the Unix based operating system.
Yeah, so say like say I wanted to do
something just to see like how this
worked like would I be able to like you
know your mouse has the tracker to tell
where the actual cursor is on the screen.
So say I wanted to shift that by,
you know like 10 pixels in either direction.
Would I be able to overwrite like
the file that's stored in the system
that the device manager accesses
to change that like distance?
Uh, The thing is, uh.
Uh, you are thinking of,
for instance, let's see,
for instance, here we have mouse.
As a file,
and you think that when the mouse changes,
this is an actual file.
That, for instance, it has the position X&Y,
and whenever you change the position of mad
devalue of the X&Y inside the file changes.
So if you can open this file and percent
change the Y to another value then
you are changing the position of the.
The thing is that there is no actual file,
it's a connection to the mouse.
That's why I in the first slide
so that it's a connection.
So basically whenever there is no
actual file in any other devices.
Whenever you want to see the
actual position of the mouse,
you just ask this file to read from,
but there is no file when you open this file,
there is no actual file.
It is connected to device
of the mouse which has the.
For instance, a signals of zero ones.
Oh, so are you saying that if
I wanted to make that change,
I would actually have to modify
the hardware on the No, no,
no no no no no no.
One thing is not all that mean.
You remember back here?
It's still your possible to
change the value of X&Y, so here.
For instance, in the machine in,
this is a mouse.
So let's wait this acquisition.
Get done with today's lecture.
So if anyone wants to leave the class,
feel free to leave the class so next.
Lecture I'm going to continue
with the file system.
So Victor to USA with me and then
you too have a great day guys.
But if you are interested you can
stay and see what happens with this.
So one thing is that their story is this.
Imagine you are moving the mouse.
Uh. At any point that you
change the position mouse.
Send electrical shock or IRQ.
Princess 01 to this processor.
Again, this is very simplified story.
So the processor at anytime that is
running other programs and etc receives.
This stops the other opcodes and says
that I receive electrical shock.
Who gonna handle that?
We already know that there is a
table that shows that the handler of
the mouse IRQ is part of the Unix.
For instance, the device manager,
one part of the device manager,
is for mouse movement.
Processor. Goes to that handler,
which is inside the memory and tries
to run this part of the program.
This part of the program analyzes the other.
I mean the other bits and bytes after
this IRQ, so when the mouse sends the IRQ,
it also sends the the the.
Physical position based on the monitor.
For instance 0101 and this is the X.
And for instance 0010.
This is the one.
But these are these are old
electrical signals, yes.
So the processor received the IRQ,
caused the handler and then the
processor sends these binary
values to the mouse handler.
Now the mouse handler knows the the.
Correct position of the mouse.
So this is the device manager.
Now you have a program here.
That you want to know what is the position
of mass and you want to change it.
In order to do that, you have to 1st.
Called the.
File Manager.
Part of the kernel.
And say that open the mouse for me.
Define manager.
Opens the mouse for you by giving an ID,
for instance two or three
or whatever Francis file.
It's a kind of number,
but it doesn't matter.
OK, now by giving the file
the File Manager give the code
access to the mouse handler
part of the device manager.
Now when it says the the YOUR program
doesn't know that it is connected
to the device manager. Your program
just communicate with this number.
Now it's only that read. 5.
So read file from the program means
that read from the file file,
but five is not the file,
it is the direct connection
to the device manager.
And then my friend.
Updating value, yes, it gives you the X&Y.
Now you can change the X&Y to
any other position.
So now you want to say that I want to
change the position the mouse position
of the inside the on top of the monitor,
so they think that.
When you see the mouse,
this is a monitor display of the position.
So then you say that I changed X.
I changed the wine.
+2.
And then I write.
Sorry I have to face and monitor you ask the.
Find manager to open the monitor for you.
For instance, it returns to the number
10 as he connection to the monitor and
then you say that right X and then
y + 2 to what device to the monitor.
The display of your mouse position
inside the monitor changes.
Gotcha, OK, but your mouse on
your table actually changes no.
Right, so it's really just
going to display value,
not the initial value itself.
It's not, yeah, OK.
Now another thing is that who knows
their relative position of a mass.
For instance,
right now my my my pen is here OK,
but when I put it here,
who knows that?
This is the distance Y and
this is the distance X.
There are some setting by the device
manager that has sets the coordination
of the monitor and when the most
moves based on that coordination
the the values that sent by the
mass to the processor become interpreted.
Who can interpret it correctly?
The device manager or the mouse handler?
The processor sees this as a zero once,
but it doesn't know this is an X.
This is Anna.
Why?
Who knows these are X&Y,
and these are the distances from the
top and left part of the monitor.
The mouse handler knows that.
Why?
Because the device manager part
of the kernel knows?
Where is the monitor?
What are the config of the manager and etc.
Gotcha, so one of the things I'm
like I had done in the assignment.
That question,
like explain the trip to the
mouse click takes to the kernel
and so like I understand the high
level portion of it like this.
The part that I'm a little
confused by still is.
The actual mouse device
driver like handler like.
How does that 'cause from
the way that I had read it.
Basically the device manager
portion or I guess we'll call
it like the handler for each
device essentially acts as like
an add on to the kernel itself,
but I don't really understand
how it gets there.
In the first place.
How it becomes a part of the kernel?
Yeah, exactly. Oh, so you you seen
operating system such as Windows that when
you attach a new system it automatically
when you attach it in again it does
electrical shock to the processor
processor called the device manager.
All my God there is a new device.
The operating system asks you to
give the device driver and when
you give it to the device driver
it because it for instance a copy.
In Windows I think.
There's a extension for this fight anyways.
It copies those programs for
the device driver into the main
directories of the operating system.
So that's why that that's the way
that it becomes part of the kernel.
Driver. Like those driver files,
because it happens automatically.
Is that mean there's actually a small
amount of storage in the devices
themselves that hold that code?
It may be it may it may have it.
Yes they have it or it depends on the device.
For instance,
some of the devices because they are famous,
for instance standard keyboard.
These are 101 hundred keyboard disorder,
standard light post. You build a keyboard.
You have to follow this standard
based on this standard Microsoft
or any distribution of operation
already have the driver if you want
to have a new keyboard,
for instance with just five keys,
then the operating system
may not recognize that.
So either you have to find a way to
introduce your device driver to this system.
A user in the windows,
for instance,
you go to the device to right click
and you select the device driver
automatically copy your device
driver to the folder of the windows.
Uh,
in the Unix based system you have to
copy those drivers into specific folders.
Yeah, I mean,
these are the the very naive
ways of doing that, yeah?
OK yeah 'cause I have had
to do it manually before.
Where you download it from the manufacturer
website and then actually install it.
So I guess it yeah it just kind of depends
on what you're using then yeah and then.
For the video cards,
for instance video cards you
are there is a set of.
You see when you buy a product,
it comes with a CD ROM and they say that
you have to keep these drivers or in
the website you have to download the drivers.
These are all additional managers that
cannot be added to the device manager.
Part of the kernel.
And the end.
Are they persistent as soon as it's
installed like once it's installed,
it saved new memory OK?
Yes, I mean what one thing I mean?
What is kernel?
The kernel is just a bunch of
files in a specific folder.
For instance in folder USR or some
other folders being and other folders.
These are just some bunch of files.
When it becomes Carol,
when it is blue distracted memory.
Whatever you add in these folders,
because part of the Canon,
that's it. Simple gotcha.
Yeah, OK, thank you Sir.
You're welcome.
OK, I'm going to be in the office,
so if any question remains I can be,
I can answer there.
Uh, have a great day.